Stranger Anxiety - The fear of strangers that infants have, begins by 8 months. 

Attachment - An emotional tie with another person; shown in young children to seek closeness to their caregiver, and shows distress on separation. 

Critical Period - An optimal period early in the life of an organism when exposure to certain stimuli or experiences produces normal development. 

Imprinting - The process by which certain animals form strong attachments during early life. 

Strange Situation - A procedure for studying child-caregiver attachment; a child is placed in an unfamiliar environment with the caregiver leaving and returning; the child’s reactions are observed. 

Secure Attachment - Infants who comfortably explore environments with the caregiver, but shows temporary distress when the caregiver leaves, then is comforted when they return.

Insecure Attachment - Infants who display either a clinging, anxious attachment or an avoidant attachment that resist closeness. 

Temperament - A person’s characteristic emotional reactivity and intensity. 

Basic Trust - A sense that the world is predictable and trustworthy; said to be formed during infancy by appropriate experiences with responsive caregivers. 

Sex - The biologically influenced characteristics by which people define male and female. 

Gender - The socially influenced characteristics by which people define boy, girl, man, and woman. 

Aggression - Any physical or verbal behavior intended to harm someone physically or emotionally. 

Relational Aggression - An act of aggression intended to harm a relationship or social standing. 

Role - A set of expectations about a social position, and how they are supposed to behave. 

Gender Role - A set of expected behaviors for males and females. 

Gender Identity - Our sense of being male, female, or a combination of the two. 

Social Learning Theory - The theory that we learn social behavior by observing and imitating and by being rewarded or punished. 

Gender Typing - The acquisition of a traditional masculine or feminine role. 

Androgyny - Displaying both feminine and masculine psychological characteristics. 

Transgender - An umbrella term describing people whose gender identity or expression differs from that associated with their birth-designated sex. 

Cognition - All the mental activities associated with thinking, knowing, remembering, and communicating. 

Schema - A concept or framework that organizes and interprets information. 

Assimilation - Interpreting new experiences in terms of our existing schemas. 

Accommodation (Developmental Psychology) - Adapting existing schemas to incorporate new information. 

Sensorimotor Stage - The stage (birth to 2 years) during which infants know the world mostly in terms of their sensory impressions and motor activities. 

Object Permanence - The awareness that things continue to exist even when not perceived.

Preoperational Stage - The stage (2 to 6/7 years) during which a child learns to use language but does not yet comprehend the mental operations of concrete logic. 

Conservation - The principle that properties such as mass, volume, and number remain the same despite changes in the forms of objects. 

Egocentric - The preoperational child’s difficulty taking another’s point of view. 

Theory of Mind - People’s ideas about their own and others’ mental states- about their feelings, perceptions, and thoughts, and the behaviors these might predict. 

Concrete Operational Stage - The stage of cognitive development (7 to 11 years) during which children gain the mental operations that enable them to think logically about concrete events. 

Formal Operational Stage - The stage of cognitive development (12+) during which people begin to think logically about abstract concepts. 

Scaffold - A framework that offers children temporary support as they develop higher levels of thinking. 

Autism Spectrum Disorder - A disorder that appears in childhood and is marked by significant deficiencies in communication and social interaction, and by rigidly fixated interests and repetitive behaviors. 

Maturation - Biological growth processes that enable orderly changes in behavior, relatively uninfluenced by experience.

Developmental Psychology - A branch that studies physical, cognitive and social change throughout the lifespan.

Zygote - The fertilized egg enters a 2-week period of rapid cell division and develops into one. 

Embryo - The developing human organism from about 2 weeks after fertilization through the second month. 

Fetus - The developing human organism from about 9 weeks after conception to birth. 

Teratogens - ‘Monster maker’ agents such as chemicals and viruses that reach the embryo or fetus during prenatal development that causes harm. 

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome - Physical and cognitive abnormalities in children caused by a pregnant woman’s drinking, severe cases causing small unproportional head and facial features. 

Habituation - Decreasing responsiveness with repeated exposure to a stimulus. 

Adolescence - The transition period between childhood and adulthood, from puberty to independence. 

Puberty - The period of sexual maturation, where a person is capable of reproducing. 

Preconventional Morality - Self-interest, follows rules to gain rewards and avoid punishment.

Conventional Morality - Uphold laws and rules to gain social approval.

Postconventional Morality - Belief in basic rights and self-defined ethical principles.

Identity - Our sense of self; the adolescence’s task is to solidify a sense of self by testing and integrating various roles.

Social Identity - A self-concept of ourselves that comes from our group memberships.

Intimacy - The ability to form close, loving relationships; primary development task in young adulthood. 

Emerging Adulthood - A period from age 18 to mid-twenties when many in Western cultures are no longer adolescence but have not achieved full independence as adults. 

X Chromosome - The sex chromosome found in both males and females.

Y Chromosome - The sex chromosome typically found only in males. 

Testosterone - Most important sex hormone, in males it stimulates the growth of the male sex organs during the fetal period and development of the male sex characteristics during puberty. 

Primary Sex Characteristics - The body structures (ovaries, testes, and external genitalia) that make sexual reproduction possible. 

Secondary Sex Characteristics - Non Reproductive sexual traits, such as female breasts, hips, voice quality, and body hair. 

Spermarche - The first ejaculation

Menarche - The first menstrual period

Intersex - A condition at birth due to unusual combinations of male and female chromosomes, hormones, and anatomy, possessing biological sexual characteristics of both sexes. 

AIDS - A sexually transmitted infection caused by HIV, depletes the immune system leaving the person vulnerable to infections. 

Sexual Orientation - Enduring sexual attraction, homosexual, heterosexual, or bisexual orientation. 

Menopause - The time of natural cessation of menstruation also refers to the biological changes a woman experiences as her ability to reproduce declines. 

Longitudinal Study - Research that follows and retests the same people over time. 

Cross-Sectional Study - Research that compares people of different ages at the same point in time.  

Neurocognitive Disorder - Acquired disorders marked by cognitive deficits often related to Alzheimer’s diseases, brain injury or diseases, or substance abuse. Formerly called dementia for older adults. 

Alzheimers Disease - A neurocognitive disorder marked by neural plaques, often with onset after age 80, and entailing a progressive decline in memory and other cognitive abilities. 

Social Clock - The culturally preferred timing of social events, such as marriage, parenthood, and retirement. 
