Psychological Disorders - A syndrome marked by a clinically significant disturbance in an individual’s cognition, emotion, regulation, or behavior.

Medical Model - The concept that diseases have physical causes that can be diagnosed, treated, and cured.

Epigenetics - The study of environment influences on gene expression that occur without a DNA change

ADHD - A psychological disorder marked by extreme inattention and/or hyperactivity and impulsivity. 

Anxiety Disorders - Psychological disorders characterized by distressing, persisting anxiety or maladaptive behaviors that reduce anxiety. 

Social Anxiety Disorder - Intense fear and avoidance of social situations. 

Generalized Anxiety Disorder - An anxiety disorder where someone is continually tense, apprehensive, and in a state of autonomic nervous system arousal. 

Panic Disorder - An anxiety disorder marked by unpredictable, minutes long episodes of intense dread in which a person may experience terror and accompanying chest pain, choking, or other frightening experiences.  

Agoraphobia - Fear or avoidance of situations, such as crowds or wide open places, where one has felt loss of control or panic. 

Phobias - An anxiety disorder marked by a persistent, irrational fear and avoidance of a specific object, activity, or situation. 

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder - A disorder characterized by unwanted repetitive thoughts, actions, or both

Post Traumatic Stress Disorder - A disorder characterized by haunting memories, nightmares, hypervigilance, social withdrawal, jumpy anxiety, numbness of feeling, and or insomnia that lingers for four weeks or more after a traumatic experience. 

Major Depressive Disorders - A disorder in which a person experiences, in the absence of drugs or other medical conditions, two or more weeks with five or more symptoms, at least one of which must be either, depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure. 

Bipolar Disorder - A disorder in which a person alternates between the hopelessness and lethargy of depression and the overexcited state of mania.

Mania - A hyperactive, wildly optimistic state in which dangerously poor judgement is common. 

Rumination - Compulsive fretting; overthinking our problems and their causes

Schizophrenia - A disorder characterized by delusions, hallucinations, disorganized speech, and or diminished, inappropriate emotional expression. 

Psychotic Disorder - A group of disorders marked by irrational ideas, distorted perception, and a loss of contact with reality. 

Hallucinations - False sensory experiences, such as seeing something in the absence of an external visual stimulus. 

Delusions - A false belief. Often of persecution or grandeur, that may accompany psychotic disorders. 

Chronic Schizophrenia - A form of schizophrenia in which symptoms usually appear by late adolescence or early adulthood, As people age, psychotic episodes last longer and recovery periods shorten. 

Acute Schizophrenia - A form of schizophrenia that can begin at any age; frequently occurs in response to a traumatic event. 

Somatic Symptom Disorder - A psychological disorder in which the symptoms take a somatic form without apparent physical cause. 

Conversion Disorder - A disorder related to somatic symptom disorder in which a person experiences very specific, physical symptoms that are not compatible with recognized medical or neurological conditions. 

Illness Anxiety Disorder - A disorder related to somatic symptom disorder in which a person interprets normal physical sensations as symptoms of disease. 

Dissociative Disorder - Controversial, rare disorders in which conscious awareness becomes separated from previous memories, thoughts, and feelings. 

Dissociative Identity Disorder - A rare dissociative disorder in which a person exhibits two or more distinct and alternating personalities. 

Personality Disorder - Inflexible  and enduring behavior patterns that impair social functioning. 

Antisocial Personality Disorder - A personality disorder in which a person exhibits a lack of conscience for wrongdoing, even toward friends and family members; may be aggressive and ruthless or a clever con artist. 

Anorexia Nervosa - An eating disorder in which a person maintains a starvation diet despite being significantly underweight; sometimes accompanied by excessive exercise. 

Bulimia Nervosa - An eating disorder in which a person’s binge eating is followed by inappropriate weight-loss promoting behavior, such as vomiting, laxative use, fasting, or excessive exercise. 

Binge-Eating Disorder - Significant binge-eating episodes, followed by distress, disgust, or guilt, but without the compensatory behavior that marks bulimia nervosa. 

Psychotherapy - Treatment involving psychological techniques; consists of interactions between a trained therapist and someone seeking to overcome psychological difficulties or achieve personal growth.  

Biomedical Therapy - Prescribed medications or procedures that act directly on the person’s psychology. 

Eclectic - An approach to psychotherapy that uses techniques from various forms of therapy.

Psychoanalysis - Freud’s therapeutic technique in treating psychological disorders, where the therapist’s interpretations of dreams, free associations, etc, can release repressed feelings and give the patient self-insight. 

Resistance - In psychoanalysis, the blocking from consciousness of anxiety-laden material.

Interpretation - In psychoanalysis, the analyst’s noting supposed dream meanings, resistances, and other significant behaviors and events in order to promote insight. 

Transferring - In psychoanalysis, the patient’s transfer to the analyst of emotions linked with other relationships.

Psychodynamic Therapy - Therapy derived from the psychodynamic tradition; views individuals as responding to unconscious forces and childhood experiences, and seeks to enhance self-insight. 

Insight Therapy - Therapies that aim to improve psychological functioning by increasing a person’s awareness of underlying motives and defenses. 

Client-Centered Therapy - The therapist uses techniques such as active listening within an accepting, genuine, empathic environment to facilitate a client’s growth.

Active Listening - Empathic listening in which the listener echoes, restates, and clarifies. 

Unconditional Positive Regard - A caring, accepting, non judgemental attitude which is believed to help clients develop self-awareness and self-acceptance. 

Behavior Therapy - Therapy that applies learning principles to the elimination of unwanted behaviors. 

Counterconditioning - A behavior therapy procedure that uses classical conditioning to evoke new responses to stimuli that triggers unwanted behaviors. 

Exposure Therapy - A behavioral technique that treats anxieties by exposing people to the things they fear and avoid.

Systematic Desensitization - A type of exposure therapy that associates a pleasant relaxed state with gradually increasing anxiety-triggering stimuli.  

VR Exposure Therapy - A counterconditioning technique that treats anxiety through electronic simulations where people can safely face their greatest fears. 

Aversive Conditioning - A type of counterconditioning that associates an unpleasant state with an unwanted behavior. 

Token Economy - An operant conditioning procedure where people earn a token for exhibiting a desired behavior and can later trade those tokens for privileges or treats.  

Cognitive Therapy - Therapy that teaches new, more adaptive ways of thinking, based on the assumption that thoughts intervene between events and our emotional reactions. 

Rational-Emotive Behavior Therapy - A confrontational cognitive therapy that vigorously challenges the people’s illogical, self-defeating attitudes and assumptions. 

Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy - An integrative therapy that combines cognitive therapy and behavioral therapy. 

Group Therapy - Therapy conducted with groups rather than individuals, providing benefits from group interaction. 

Family Therapy - Therapy that treats people in the context of their family system. Views an individual’s unwanted behaviors as influenced by, or directed at, other family members.  

Meta-Analysis - A procedure for statistically combining the results of many different research studies.  

Evidence-Based Practice - Clinical decision making that integrates the best available research with clinical expertise and patient characteristics and preferences. 

Therapeutic Alliance - A bond of trust and mutual understanding between a therapist and a client, who work together constructively to overcome the client’s problem. 

Psychopharmacology - The study of effects of drugs on mind and behavior.

Antipsychotic Drugs - Drugs used to treat schizophrenia and other forms of severe thought disorders. 

Antianxiety Drugs - Drugs used to control anxiety and agitation.

Antidepressant Drugs - Drugs used to treat depression, anxiety disorders, OCD, PTSD

Electrocompulsive Therapy - A biomedical therapy for severely depressed patients in which a brief electric current is sent through the brain of an anesthetized patient. 

Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation - The application of repeated pulses of magnetic energy to the brain, used to stimulate or suppress brain activity. 

Psychosurgery - Surgery that removes or destroys brain tissue in an effort to change behavior. 

Lobotomy - A psychosurgical procedure once used to calm uncontrollably emotional or violent patients. The procedure cut the nerves connecting the frontal lobes to the emotion-controlling centers of the inner brain.

Resilience - The personal strength that helps most people cope with stress and recover from adversity and even trauma.

Posttraumatic Growth - Positive psychological changes as a result of struggling with extremely challenging circumstances and life crises. 
