Neurons - A nerve cell, the basic building block of the nervous system

Cell body - The part of the neuron that has the nucleus, the cell’s life support

Dendrites - Bushy and branching extensions that receive and integrate messages, and send impulses to the cell body

Axon - Neuron extension that sends messages to glands, other neurons, or muscles

Myelin Sheath - A fatty tissue layer encasing the axons of some neurons, which increases the speed of neural impulses

Glial Cell - A cell in the nervous system that supports, nourishes, and protects neurons, and also is linked with learning, memory, and thinking

Action Potential - A neural impulse, a brief electrical charge that travels down the axon

Threshold - The level of stimulation required to trigger a neural impulse 

Refractory Period - The brief resting pause after a neuron has fired, new action potential cannot happen if the neuron does not return to the resting state.

All-or-None Response - A neuron’s reaction of firing at full force or not firing at all.

Synapse - The junction of the axon tip of the sending neuron and the dendrite/cell body of the receiving neuron. The tiny gap is called the synaptic gap/cleft

Neurotransmitter - Chemical messengers that cross synaptic gaps, bind to receptor sites, and influence if it will generate a neural impulse.

Reuptake - A neurotransmitter’s reabsorption by the sending neuron. 

Endorphins - Natural opiate-like neurotransmitters that affect the perception of pain or pleasure.

Agonist - A molecule that increases the action of a neurotransmitter.

Antagonist - A molecule that decreases the action of a neurotransmitter.

Adrenal Glands - A pair of endocrine glands that are above the kidneys, and secrete hormones (epinephrine and norepinephrine) to arouse the body in times of stress.

Pituitary Gland - The gland that is under the influence of the hypothalamus, regulates growth and controls the other endocrine glands. 

Brainstem - The oldest part and central core of the brain, beginning where the spinal cord swells as it enters the skull. The brainstem is responsible for automatic survival functions.

Medulla - Base of the brainstem, controls heartbeat and breathing.

Thalamus - The brains sensory control center on top of the brainstem. It directs messages to the sensory receiving areas in the cortex and transmits replies to the cerebellum and medulla.

Reticular Formation - A nerve network that travels through the brainstem into the thalamus, and it has an important role in controlling arousal (being awoken by stimulation). It also filters out stimuli, which is good for focus. 

Cerebellum - The  little brain at the rear of the brainstem, functions include processing sensory input, coordinating movement output and balance, enabling nonverbal learning and memory. 

Limbic System - The neural system below the cerebral hemispheres, associated with emotions and drives.

Amygdala - Lima-bean sized neural clusters in the limbic system. They are responsible emotions, for example aggression and fear.

Hypothalamus - Has multiple maintenance functions, governs the endocrine system through the pituitary gland. Also linked with emotions and rewards. 

Hippocampus - A neural center in the limbic system, helps process explicit (conscious) memories of facts and events. 

Cerebral Cortex - Interconnected neural cells covering the cerebral hemispheres, body’s ultimate control and information processing center.

Frontal Lobes - Lobe that helps with speaking, muscle movements, and makes plans and judgements. Located behind the forehead

Parietal Lobes - Lobe that receives sensory input for touch and body position, located on top rear of the head.

Occipital Lobes - Lobe that receives information of visual fields, located in the back of the head

Temporal Lobes - Lobe that gets information from opposite ear, located right above it

Motor Cortex - An area in the frontal lobe that controls voluntary movements, sends instructions to the rest of the body

Somatosensory Cortex - An area in front of the parietal lobe that processes body touch and movement sensations.

Association Areas - Areas in the cerebral cortex that does not deal with primary motor or sensory functions, but instead with higher mental functions like learning, memorizing, thinking, and speaking.
