Adolescence - The transition period between childhood and adulthood, from puberty to independence. 

Puberty - The period of sexual maturation, where a person is capable of reproducing. 

Preconventional Morality - Self-interest, follows rules to gain rewards and avoid punishment.

Conventional Morality - Uphold laws and rules to gain social approval.

Postconventional Morality - Belief in basic rights and self-defined ethical principles.

Identity - Our sense of self; the adolescence’s task is to solidify a sense of self by testing and integrating various roles.

Social Identity - A self-concept of ourselves that comes from our group memberships.

Intimacy - The ability to form close, loving relationships; primary development task in young adulthood. 

Emerging Adulthood - A period from age 18 to mid-twenties when many in Western cultures are no longer adolescence but have not achieved full independence as adults. 

X Chromosome - The sex chromosome found in both males and females.

Y Chromosome - The sex chromosome typically found only in males. 

Testosterone - Most important sex hormone, in males it stimulates the growth of the male sex organs during the fetal period and development of the male sex characteristics during puberty. 

Primary Sex Characteristics - The body structures (ovaries, testes, and external genitalia) that make sexual reproduction possible. 

Secondary Sex Characteristics - Non Reproductive sexual traits, such as female breasts, hips, voice quality, and body hair. 

Spermarche - The first ejaculation

Menarche - The first menstrual period

Intersex - A condition at birth due to unusual combinations of male and female chromosomes, hormones, and anatomy, possessing biological sexual characteristics of both sexes. 

AIDS - A sexually transmitted infection caused by HIV, depletes the immune system leaving the person vulnerable to infections. 

Sexual Orientation - Enduring sexual attraction, homosexual, heterosexual, or bisexual orientation. 

Menopause - The time of natural cessation of menstruation also refers to the biological changes a woman experiences as her ability to reproduce declines. 

Longitudinal Study - Research that follows and retests the same people over time. 

Cross-Sectional Study - Research that compares people of different ages at the same point in time.  

Neurocognitive Disorder - Acquired disorders marked by cognitive deficits often related to Alzheimer’s diseases, brain injury or diseases, or substance abuse. Formerly called dementia for older adults. 

Alzheimers Disease - A neurocognitive disorder marked by neural plaques, often with onset after age 80, and entailing a progressive decline in memory and other cognitive abilities. 

Social Clock - The culturally preferred timing of social events, such as marriage, parenthood, and retirement. 
