Social Psychology - The scientific study of how we think about, influence, and relate to one another

Attribution Theory - The theory that we explain someone's behavior by crediting either the situation or the person's disposition

Fundamental Attribution Error - The tendency for observers, when analyzing others behavior, to underestimate the impact of the situation and to overestimate the impact of personal disposition. 

Attitude - Feelings, often influenced by our beliefs, that predispose us to respond in a particular way to objects, people, and events.

Peripheral Route Persuasion - Occurs when people are influenced by incidental cues, such as a speaker's attractiveness. 

Central Route Persuasion - Occurs when interested people focus on the arguments and respond with favorable thoughts. 

Foot-in-the-Door Phenomenon - The tendency for people who have first agreed to a small request to comply later with a larger request. 

Role - A set of expectations about a social position, defining how those in the position ought to behave.

Cognitive Dissonance Theory - The theory that we act to reduce the discomfort we feel when two of our thoughts are inconsistent.

Norms - Understood rules for accepted and expected behavior. 

Conformity - Adjusting our behavior or thinking to coincide with a group’s behavior.

Normative Social Influence - Influence resulting from a person’s desire to gain approval or avoid disapproval.

Informational Social Influence - Influence resulting from one’s willingness to accept others’ opinions of reality. 

Social Facilitation - Improved performance on simple or well-learned tasks in the presence of others. 

Social Loafing - The tendency for people to exert less effort when pooling their efforts toward attaining a common goal then when individually accountable. 

Deindividualization - The loss of self-awareness and self-restraint occurring in group situations that foster arousal and anonymity. 

Group Polarization - The enhancement of a group’s prevailing inclinations through discussion within the group. 

Groupthink - The mode of thinking that occurs when the desire for harmony in a decision-making group overrides a realistic appraisal of alternatives. 

Culture - The enduring behaviors, ideas, attitudes, values, and traditions shared by a group of people and transmitted from one generation to the next. 

Prejudice - An unjustifiable attitude toward a group and its members, involves stereotype beliefs, negative feelings, and a predisposition to discriminatory action. 

Stereotype - A generalized belief about a group of people. 

Discrimination - Unjustifiable negative behavior toward a group and its members. 

Just-World Phenomenon - The tendency to believe that people get what they deserve and deserve what they get. 

Ingroup - Us, people who share a common identity. 

Outgroup - Them, people who are viewed as different.

Ingroup Bias - The tendency to favor our own group. 

Scapegoat Theory - The theory that prejudice offers an outlet for anger by providing someone to blame. 

Other-Race Effect - The tendency to recall faces of one’s own race more accurately than the faces of other races. 