Motivation - A need or desire that energizes and directs behavior.

Instinct - A complex behavior that is rigidly patterned throughout a species and is unlearned.

Physiological Needs - A basic bodily requirement.

Drive-Reduction Theory - The idea that a physiological need creates an aroused state (a drive) that motivates the organism to satisfy the need.

Homeostasis - A tendency to maintain a balanced or constant internal state.

Incentives - A positive or negative environmental stimulus that motivates behavior.

Yerkes-Dodson Law - The principle that performance increases with arousal only to a certain point, beyond which performance decreases. 

Hierarchy of Needs - Maslow’s pyramid of needs, where the bottom is physiological needs, next is safety needs, and then all above is psychological needs. 

Glucose - The form of sugar that circulates in the blood and provides the major source of energy for body tissues. When it is low, we feel hunger. 

Set Point - Where the weight thermostat is set, when it is below, that is when your hunger increases. 

Basal Metabolic Rate - Body’s resting rate of energy output.

Asexual - Having no sexual attraction to others. 

Testosterone - Most important sex hormone, in males it stimulates the growth of the male sex organs during the fetal period and development of the male sex characteristics during puberty. 

Estrogen - Sex hormones such as estradiol, that contribute to female sex characteristics and appear in females in greater amounts than males. 

Sexual Response Cycle - The four stages of sexual responding described by Masters and Johnson, excitement, plateau, orgasm, and resolution. 

Refractory Period - A resting period that occurs after orgasm, during which another person cannot achieve another orgasm.

Affiliation Need - The need to build relationships and to feel a part of a group.

Ostracism - Deliberate social exclusion of individuals or groups. 

Narcissism - Excessive self-love and self-absorption

Achievement Motivation - A desire for significant accomplishment, for master of skills or ideas, for control, and for attaining a high standard. 

Grit - Passion and perseverance in the pursuit of long-term goals. 

Emotions - A response of the whole organism, involving physiological arousal, expressive behaviors, and a conscious experience. 

James-Lange Theory - The theory that the experience of emotion is our awareness of our physiological responses to an emotion-arousing stimulus. 

Cannon-Bard Theory - The theory that an emotion-arousing stimulus simultaneously triggers physiological responses and the subjective experience of emotion. 

Two-Factor Theory - The theory that to experience emotion one must be physically aroused and cognitively label the arousal. 

Facial Feedback Effect - The tendency of facial muscle states to trigger corresponding feelings such as fear, anger, and happiness. 

Behavior Feedback Effect - The tendency of behavior to influence our own and other’s thoughts, feelings, and actions. 

Stress - The process by which we perceive and respond to certain events, called stressors, that we appraise as threatening or challenging. 

General Adaptation Syndrome - Selye’s concept of the body’s adaptive response to stress in three phases, alarm, stress, and exhaustion. 

Tend-and-Befriend Response - Under stress, people (especially women) often provide support to others and bond with and seek support from others. 

Health Psychology - A subfield in psychology that provides psychology's contribution to behavioral medicine.  

Psychoneuroimmunology - The study of how psychological, neural, and endocrine processes together affect the immune system and resulting health.

Coronary Heart Disease - The clogging of the vessels that nourish the heart muscle; the leading cause of death in many developed countries

Type A - Term for competitive, hard-driving, impatient, verbally aggressive, and anger-prone people.

Type B - Term for easy-going, relaxed people

Catharsis - The idea that releasing aggressive energy (through action or fantasy) relieves aggressive urges. 

Aerobic Exercise - Sustained exercise that increases heart and lung fitness; also helps alleviate depression and anxiety.

Mindfulness Meditation - A reflective practice in which people attend to current experiences in a nonjudgmental and accepting manner. 

Feel-Good, Do-Good Phenomenon - People’s tendency to be helpful when in a good mood.

Positive Psychology - The study of human flourishing, hoping to discover and promote strengths and virtues that help individuals thrive.

Subjective Well-Being - Self-perceived happiness or satisfaction with life. Used along with measures of objective well-being to evaluate people’s quality of life. 

Adaptation-Level Phenomenon - Our tendency to form judgements relative to a neutral level defined by our prior experience. 

Relative Deprivation - The perception that one is worse off relative to those with whom one compares oneself. 

Personality - An individual’s characteristic pattern of thinking, feeling, and acting. 

Psychodynamic Theories - Theories that view personality with a focus on the unconscious and the importance of childhood experiences. 

Psychoanalysis - Freud’s theory of personality that attributes thoughts and actions to unconscious motives and conflicts. It is also Freud’s therapeutic technique in treating psychological disorders, where the therapist’s interpretations of dreams, free associations, etc, can release repressed feelings and give the patient self-insight. 

Unconscious - A reservoir of mostly unacceptable thoughts, wishes, feelings, and memories. Or information processing of which we are unaware of. 

Free Association - A method of exploring the unconscious in which the person relaxes and says whatever comes to mind, no matter how trivial and embarrassing. 

Id - A reservoir of unconscious psychic energy that strives to satisfy basic sexual and aggressive drives. Operates on the pleasure principle, that demands immediate gratification. 

Ego - The conscious executive part of personality that mediates the demands of the other parts of personality. Operates on the reality principle, satisfying desires that realistically bring pleasure than pain. 

Superego - The part personality that represents internalized ideals and provides standards for judgement (the conscious) and for future aspirations.

Psychosexual Stages - The childhood stages of development (oral, anal, phallic, latency, genital) during which the id’s pleasure-seeking energies focus on distinct erogenous zones. 

Oedipus Complex - A boy’s sexual desires toward his mother and feelings of jealousy and hatred for his rival father. 

Identification - The process by which children incorporate their parent’s values into their developing superegos. 

Fixation - A lingering focus of pleasure-seeking energies at an earlier psychosexual stage, in which conflicts were unresolved. 

Defense Mechanisms - The ego’s protective methods of reducing anxiety by unconsciously distorting reality. 

Repression - The basic defense mechanism that banishes from consciousness anxiety-arousing thoughts, feelings, and memories.

Collective Unconscious - The concept of a shared, inherited reservoir of memory traces from our species’ history. 

Projective Tests - A personality test that provides ambiguous images designed to trigger projections of one’s inner dynamics. 

Thematic Apperception Test - A projective test in which people express their inner feelings and interests through the stories they make up about ambiguous scenes. 

Rorscahch Inkblot Test - A set of 10 inkblots to identify people’s inner feelings by analyzing their interpretations of the blots.  

Terror-Management Theory - A theory of death-related anxiety; explores people’s emotional and behavioral responses to reminders of their impending death. 

Humanistic Theories - Theories that view personality with a focus on the potential for healthy personal growth. 

Hierarchy of Needs - Maslow’s pyramid of needs, where the bottom is physiological needs, next is safety needs, and then all above is psychological needs. 

Self-Actualization - One of the ultimate psychological needs that arises after basic physiological and psychological needs are met and self-esteem is achieved. The motivation to fulfill one’s potential. 

Self-Transcendence - The striving for identity, meaning, and purpose beyond the self. 

Unconditional Positive Regard - A caring, accepting, non judgemental attitude which is believed to help clients develop self-awareness and self-acceptance. 

Self-Concept - All thoughts about ourselves when asked who we are.

Trait - A characteristic pattern of behavior or a disposition to feel and act in different ways, as assessed by self-report inventories and peer reports. 

Personality Inventory - A questionnaire in which people respond to items designed to gauge a wide range of feelings and behaviors. 

Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory - The most widely used personality test, originally made to test for emotional disorders but can now be used for other screening purposes. 

Empirically Derived - A test that selects from a pool of items that discriminate between groups. 

Social-Cognitive Perspective - Views behavior as influenced by the interaction of people’s traits and their social conflicts. 

Behavioral Approach - Focuses on the effects of learning on our personality development.  

Reciprocal Determinism - The interacting influences of behavior, internal cognition, and environment. 

Self - Assumed to be the center of personality, organizer of thoughts, feelings, and actions.

Spotlight Effect - Overestimating others noticing and evaluating our appearance, performance, and blunders.

Self-Esteem - One’s feelings of high or low self-worth.

Self-Efficacy - One’s sense of competence and effectiveness.

Self-Serving Bias - A readiness to perceive oneself favorably.

Individualist - Giving priority to one’s own goals over group goals and defining one’s personality in terms of personal attributes rather than group identifications.

Collectivist - Giving priority to the goals of one’s group and defining one’s identity accordingly.