Agricultural Hearth - Where the origins of agriculture ideas and innovations begin to spread. 

Bid-Rent Theory - Land costs are higher in and around a city’s central business district due to demand.

Climate - Long term average of weather patterns in a specific area, showing factors like precipitation and humidity. 

Clustered Settlement - Settlements where families live in close proximity to each other and with fields surrounding the collection of houses and farm buildings.  

Columbian Exchange - The transfer of plants and animals, as well as people, culture and technology, between the western hemisphere and Europe, as a result of European colonization and trade. 

Commercial Agriculture - Agriculture undertaken primarily to generate products for sale off the farm. 

Commodity Chains - A linked system of processes that gather resources, convert them into goods, package them for distribution, disperse them, and sell them on the market. 

Desertification - Degradation of land, especially in semiarid areas, primarily because of human actions such as excessive crop plating, animal grazing, and tree cutting. 

Dispersed Settlement - A rural settlement pattern where individual homes and farms are spread over a large area, with significant distance between each dwelling. 

Extensive Agriculture - A type of agricultural production that involves the use of relatively  low levels of inputs, such as labor, capital and chemicals, in order to produce crops of livestock. 

Food Desert - An area where residents have limited access to affordable and nutritious food, often characterized by a lack of supermarkets or grocery stores within a convenient traveling distance. 

GMO - A living organism that possesses a novel combination of genetic material obtained through the use of modern biotechnology. 

Green Revolution - Rapid diffusion of new agricultural technology, especially new high yield seeds and fertilizers.

Intensive Agriculture - A form of subsistence agriculture in which farmers must expend a relatively large amount of effort to produce the maximum possible yield from a parcel of land. 

Linear Settlement - A type of community layout where buildings and structures are arranged in a straight line, often along a transportation route such as a road or river. 

Long Lot - A land division method that divides land into narrow strips that extend from rivers or roads, maximizing access to water resources and facilitating transportation. 

Market Gardening - A relatively small commercial farm characterized by a diversity of crops and a relationship with local markets. 

Metes and Bounds System - A method that marks the boundaries of a property according to its surrounding landmarks. 

Monocropping - The practice of growing the same single crop year after year. 

Nomadic Herding - The seasonal movement of livestock along routes to regions with available grazing land and water sources. 

Plantation - A large farm in tropical and subtropical climates that specializes in the production of one or two crops for sale, usually to a more developed country. 

Ranching - A form of commercial agriculture in which livestock graze over an extensive area.

Second Agricultural Revolution - An increase in agricultural productivity through improvement of crop rotation and breeding of livestock. 

Shifting Cultivation - A form of subsistence agriculture in which people shift activity from one field to another; each field is used for crops for a relatively few years and left fallow for a relatively long period. 

Slash and Burn Agriculture - Burning a portion of forest so that the soil there can be used for agricultural purposes. 

Soil Salinization - The accumulation of soluble salts in soil, which can hinder plant growth and reduce agricultural productivity. 

Subsistence Agriculture - Agriculture designed primarily to provide food for direct consumption by the farmer and the farmer’s family. 

Supply Chains - A system of organizations, people,. Technology, activities, information and resources involved in moving a product or service from supplier to customer. 

Township and Range System - A systematic grid-based approach that divides land into rectangular townships and sections. 

Von Thunen Model - A predictive theory that predicts humans will use land in relation to the cost of land and the cost of transporting products to market. 
